"What's new in Svelte" February newsletter (#5925)
sveltejs/svelte: site/content/blog/2021-02-01-whats-new-in-svelte-february-2021.md

authorURL: https://desandoval.net
---

With the shortest month of the year coming up, Svelte maintainers and community members alike have been busy this last month – from new aria roles in the compiler to semantic highlighting hooks in the langugage-tools. Meanwhile, lots of folks have been busy integrating Svelte with other popular frameworks.

## New compiler features
- Aria roles from the [WAI-ARIA Graphics Module](https://www.w3.org/TR/graphics-aria-1.0/#role_definitions) are now recognized as valid aria roles in Svelte components (**3.31.1**)
- Compiler warnings for the common React attributes, `className` and `htmlFor`, now make it easier to port React components to Svelte (**3.31.1**)

Have a suggestion for a compiler feature or want to help implement new features/bug fixes? Check out the ["triage: good first issue" tag for Svelte](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22triage%3A+good+first+issue%22)

## New bits in language-tools

- User disabled auto import suggestions no longer show in VS Code (**103.0.0**)
- Renaming a variable is now safer with smart additions of a prefix/suffix to renamed variables (**104.0.0**)

> - Semantic (token) highlighting for typescript users lets theme makers apply Svelte-specific styling in their themes (**104.0.0**)

Reviewer: It's not Svelte-specific styling, it's more general a TypeScript-semantic styling .

```suggestion
- Semantic (token) highlighting for TypeScript users lets theme makers apply semantic styling in their themes, if they support it (**104.0.0**)
```

- "Extract Component" has been added to the context menu - allowing you to extract components out of files without having to open the command window to type "Svelte: Extract Component" (**104.0.0**)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The VS Code extension now listens to JavaScript/TypeScript file changes - you no longer need to save the files for the changes to be noticed (**104.1.0**)

```

For the complete list of changes, check out the language-tools [Releases page](https://github.com/sveltejs/language-tools/releases).

A great way to try the language tools is to download the [Svelte Extension for VSCode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=svelte.svelte-vscode). This extension provides syntax highlighting and rich intellisense for Svelte components in VS Code, using the svelte language server. Check your editor's extension sources to see if there's a Svelte plugin for your IDE or build your own (see [coc-svelte](https://github.com/coc-extensions/coc-svelte) for example)!

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## New major version of `prettier-plugin-svelte`

`prettier-plugin-svelte` version 2 was released. It received an overhaul and comes with a rewrite of the HTML formatting. The output is now much more in line with how standard Prettier formats HTML. This is also why `svelteBracketNewLine` now defaults to `true`. Another notable default change is the sort order: `svelte:options` is now part of the sort order and the default changed to `options-scripts-markup-styles`, which is in line with how the majority of users like to order the code blocks. Additionally, Prettier's `htmlWhitespaceSensitivity` setting is now supported.

```

Author: Thanks! Definitely open to suggestions on what to highlight in svelte-loader, sapper, rollup-plugin-svelte as well ( @benmccann )
I can write a quick summary later this week based on the changelogs :)

- [This css grid gallery](https://svelte.dev/repl/3a1b7fae13b242fe9cd4a4f7aa092fa4?version=3.31.2) made by @joja (in the Svelte Discord) features grid transitions based on a user's mouse position
- [Patchcab](https://github.com/spectrome/patchcab) is a modular Eurorack style synthesizer made with Web Audio.
- [svelte-knob](https://github.com/MelihAltintas/svelte-knob) is a knob control to help with speedometer-style visualization
- [descent-ripple](https://github.com/micha-lmxt/descent-ripple) is a highly customizable javascript ripple animation for buttons
- [makeItSnow](https://github.com/florianlouvet/make-it-snow/blob/main/makeItSnowAction.js) is a Svelte action made by @MrPoule (in the Svelte Discord) that can be used to add ❄️snow❄️ to any component ([Demo](https://svelte.dev/repl/de5223beb45540a5a11c9bd7b318304f?version=3.31.2))
- [svelte-video-player](https://github.com/meigo/svelte-video-player) is a customizable `VideoPlayer` component

> - [svelte-readonly](https://github.com/Crisfole/svelte-readonly) is a very small store that only exposes a readable iterface.

Reviewer 2: iterface -> interface

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [svelte-readonly](https://github.com/Crisfole/svelte-readonly) is a very small store that exposes only a readable interface.
```

Author: 🙇 thank you both!

**New Integrations & Starters**
- [svelte-derver-starter](https://github.com/AlexxNB/svelte-derver-starter) is a starter for baking fullstack application with client based on Svelte framework and server side powered by Derver.
- [eleventy-plugin-embed-svelte](https://github.com/shalomscott/eleventy-plugin-embed-svelte) makes it easy to embed Svelte components into an 11ty site.
- [svelte-tailwind-extension-boilerplate](https://github.com/kyrelldixon/svelte-tailwind-extension-boilerplate) is a good foundation for a Chrome extension using either JavaScript or TypeScript, Svelte for the frontend, Tailwind CSS for styling, Jest for testing, and Rollup as the build system.
- [snowpack-ui](https://github.com/rajasegar/snowpack-ui) lets you run & manage Snowpack projects from the browser instead of the terminal

> - [Svelte for Appwrite](https://dev.to/torstendittmann/svelte-for-appwrite-4fkg) explains how to integrate with Appwrite, a self-hosted Firebase alternative called Appwrite ([Github Repo](https://github.com/appwrite/sdk-for-svelte))

Reviewer 4: Maybe (?)
```diff
- [Svelte for Appwrite](https://dev.to/torstendittmann/svelte-for-appwrite-4fkg) explains how to integrate with Appwrite, a self-hosted Firebase alternative called Appwrite ([Github Repo](https://github.com/appwrite/sdk-for-svelte))
+ [Svelte for Appwrite](https://dev.to/torstendittmann/svelte-for-appwrite-4fkg) explains how to integrate with Appwrite, a self-hosted Firebase alternative [Github Repo](https://github.com/appwrite/sdk-for-svelte)
```

- [here-maps-svelte](https://github.com/peopledrivemecrazy/here-maps-svelte) makes it easy to include HERE maps in a Svelte app
- [p5-svelte](https://github.com/tonyketcham/p5-svelte) is an absolutely dead simple way of tossing the creative coding/sketching tool, p5, into a project
- [svelte-windicss-preprocess](https://github.com/voorjaar/svelte-windicss-preprocess) is a svelte preprocessor to compile tailwindcss at build time based on windicss compiler
- [MitzaCoder/svelte-boilerplate](https://github.com/MitzaCoder/svelte-boilerplate) features configurations for Typescript, TailwindCSS, IE11 compatibility (with Babel) and lazy loaded modules.

**Want to share your Svelte Component with the world?** Head over to the [Components](https://sveltesociety.dev/components) page on the Svelte Society site. You can contribute by making [a PR to this file](https://github.com/svelte-society/sveltesociety.dev/blob/master/src/pages/components/components.json).

**Learning Resources**

> - [lihautan's Svelte Actions Playlist](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ciaMT_MswzE&list=PLoKaNN3BjQX3Gl14MBygFf8buPIw9pAeK) teachings how Actions work and how they can help solve common problems when developing Svelte applications

Reviewer 2: i think it should be teaches and not teaching
```diff
- - [lihautan's Svelte Actions Playlist](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ciaMT_MswzE&list=PLoKaNN3BjQX3Gl14MBygFf8buPIw9pAeK) teachings how Actions work and how they can help solve common problems when developing Svelte applications
+ - [lihautan's Svelte Actions Playlist](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ciaMT_MswzE&list=PLoKaNN3BjQX3Gl14MBygFf8buPIw9pAeK) teaches how Actions work and how they can help solve common problems when developing Svelte applications
```

---
title: What's new in Svelte: February 2021
description: Integrations and improvements at lightning speed...
author: Daniel Sandoval
authorURL: https://desandoval.net
---

> With the shortest month of the year coming up, Svelte maintainers and community members alike have been busy this last month – from big changes in svelte-loader, prettier-plugin-svelte, rollup-plugin-svelte, and language-tools to steady progress in sapper and svelte-preprocess. Meanwhile, lots of folks have been busy integrating Svelte with other popular frameworks.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
With the shortest month of the year coming up, Svelte maintainers and community members alike have been busy this last month – from big changes in `svelte-loader`, `prettier-plugin-svelte`, `rollup-plugin-svelte`, and `language-tools` to steady progress in sapper and svelte-preprocess. Meanwhile, lots of folks have been busy integrating Svelte with other popular frameworks.
```

- Semantic (token) highlighting for TypeScript users lets theme makers apply semantic styling in their themes, if they support it (**104.0.0**)
- "Extract Component" has been added to the context menu - allowing you to extract components out of files without having to open the command window to type "Svelte: Extract Component" (**104.0.0**)
- The VS Code extension now listens to JavaScript/TypeScript file changes - you no longer need to save the files for the changes to be noticed (**104.1.0**)

For the complete list of changes, check out the language-tools [Releases page](https://github.com/sveltejs/language-tools/releases).

A great way to try the language tools is to download the [Svelte Extension for VSCode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=svelte.svelte-vscode). This extension provides syntax highlighting and rich intellisense for Svelte components in VS Code, using the svelte language server. Check your editor's extension sources to see if there's a Svelte plugin for your IDE or build your own (see [coc-svelte](https://github.com/coc-extensions/coc-svelte) for example)!

> ## Big improvements across the sveltejs ecosystem

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Big improvements across the Svelte ecosystem
```

- [svelte-loader](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte-loader) released a major version, 3.0.0 - featuring Webpack 5 and Node 14 support, better hot reloading, and new `compilerOptions` to match `rollup-plugin-svelte`. Breaking changes include dropping Svelte 2 and Node 8 support. [More info in the changelog](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte-loader/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md)

> - [rollup-plugin-svelte](https://github.com/sveltejs/rollup-plugin-svelte) is now at version 7.x - with support for relative filenames, better handling of sourcemaps, and consistent `compilerOptions`. If you're using an older version of Svelte, Node or Rollup, be sure to [checkout the changelog](https://github.com/sveltejs/rollup-plugin-svelte/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md) before upgrading

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [rollup-plugin-svelte](https://github.com/sveltejs/rollup-plugin-svelte) is now at version 7.x - with support for relative filenames, better handling of sourcemaps, and consistent `compilerOptions`. Be sure to [checkout the changelog](https://github.com/sveltejs/rollup-plugin-svelte/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md) for breaking changes when upgrading
```

Even if you're not using any of those things there may be breaking changes

- [svelte-preprocess](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte-preprocess) iterated through some 4.6.x releases this month to improve postcss and scss handling and fix sourcemap transformation for typescript users. [More info in the changelog](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte-preprocess/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md)

> - [sapper](https://github.com/sveltejs/sapper) got some big improvements in scroll tracking and handling encoding query parameters. Dynamic imports also now work as expected in browsers that don't support ES modules. These changes from 0.29.0 and a step-by-step migration guide can be found [in the changelog](https://github.com/sveltejs/sapper/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [Sapper](https://github.com/sveltejs/sapper) got some improvements in scroll tracking and handling encoding query parameters. Dynamic imports also now work as expected in browsers that don't support ES modules. These changes from 0.29.0 and a step-by-step migration guide can be found [in the changelog](https://github.com/sveltejs/sapper/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md)
```
